# NAME

fastq — a text-based format for representing nucleotide sequences and
their corresponding quality scores

# DESCRIPTION

(WIP)

In fastq files, each entry is made of *sequence header* starting with a
symbol ‘@’, a nucleotidic *sequence* (same rules as for fasta
sequences), a *quality header* starting with a symbol ‘+’, and a
*quality string* of ASCII characters (offset 33 or 64), each one
encoding the quality value of the corresponding position in the
nucleotidic sequence.

The *sequence* is defined as a string of IUPAC symbols
(‘ACGTURYSWKMDBHVN’), starting after the end of the header line and
ending before the next header line, or the file’s end. vsearch silently
ignores ascii characters 9 to 13, and exits with an error message if
ascii characters 0 to 8, 14 to 31, ‘.’ or ‘-’ are present. All other
ascii or non-ascii characters are stripped and complained about in a
warning message.

In fastq files, each entry is made of a *sequence header*, a *sequence*,
a *quality header*, … The header is defined as the string comprised
between the initial ‘\>’ symbol and the first space, tabulation, or new
line symbol, unless the `--notrunclabels` option is in effect, in which
case the entire line is included.

The *header* should contain printable ascii characters (33-126). The
program will terminate with a fatal error if there are unprintable ascii
characters (see `ascii(7)`). A warning will be issued if non-ascii
characters (128-255) are encountered.

If the header matches the pattern ‘\>\[;\]size=integer;label’, the
pattern ‘\>label;size=integer;label’, or the pattern
‘\>label;size=integer\[;\]’, vsearch will interpret integer as the
number of occurrences (or abundance) of the sequence in the study. That
abundance information is used or created during chimera detection,
clustering, dereplication, sorting and searching.

# EXAMPLES

(give examples of valid and invalid fastq files)

# SEE ALSO

[`vsearch-fasta(5)`](./vsearch-fasta.5.md),
[`vsearch-udb(5)`](./vsearch-udb.5.md)

# CITATION

Rognes T, Flouri T, Nichols B, Quince C, Mahé F. (2016) VSEARCH: a
versatile open source tool for metagenomics. **PeerJ** 4:e2584 doi:
[10.7717/peerj.2584](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.2584)

# REPORTING BUGS

Submit suggestions and bug-reports at
<https://github.com/torognes/vsearch/issues>, send a pull request on
<https://github.com/torognes/vsearch>, or compose a friendly or
curmudgeont e-mail to Torbjørn Rognes (torognes@ifi.uio.no).

# AVAILABILITY

Source code and binaries are available at
<https://github.com/torognes/vsearch>.

# COPYRIGHT

Copyright (C) 2014-2024, Torbjørn Rognes, Frédéric Mahé and Tomás Flouri

All rights reserved.

Contact: Torbjørn Rognes <torognes@ifi.uio.no>, Department of
Informatics, University of Oslo, PO Box 1080 Blindern, NO-0316 Oslo,
Norway

This software is dual-licensed and available under a choice of one of
two licenses, either under the terms of the GNU General Public License
version 3 or the BSD 2-Clause License.

## GNU General Public License version 3

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General
Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program. If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

## The BSD 2-Clause License

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS “AS
IS” AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR
PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING
NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS
SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank the authors of the following projects for making
their source code available:

-   **vsearch** includes code from Google’s CityHash project by Geoff
    Pike and Jyrki Alakuijala, providing some excellent hash functions
    available under a MIT license.
-   **vsearch** includes code derived from Tatusov and Lipman’s DUST
    program that is in the public domain.
-   **vsearch** includes public domain code written by Alexander Peslyak
    for the MD5 message digest algorithm.
-   **vsearch** includes public domain code written by Steve Reid and
    others for the SHA1 message digest algorithm.
-   **vsearch** binaries may include code from the zlib library,
    copyright Jean-Loup Gailly and Mark Adler.
-   **vsearch** binaries may include code from the bzip2 library,
    copyright Julian R. Seward.
